---
title: 3. TCP, UDP and Three-Way Handshake
updated: 2022-08-24 09:35:57Z
created: 2022-08-21 06:46:20Z
latitude: 50.11092210
longitude: 8.68212670
altitude: 0.0000
---

# 1\. Transport Layer - OSI Model

- Transport layer of the OSI model uses either TCP or UDP to connect to the applications.

# 2\. Three-Way Handshake

## 2.1 syn ➡ syn ack ➡ ack

- First a **syn** packet is sent and we receive syn ack packet and then we send ack packet back ensuring the other party that we're in conversation with them.
- syn is like starting interaction with a stranger by saying hello to him.
- syn ack or stranger will wave back at you or stop to acknowledge that he has received your request to start a conversation.
- By sending ack packet back, we ensure that we're good to go start a conversation and that's the acknowledgment.

## 2.2 Utilizing Three-Way Handshake on Website

- We want to connect to a website and let's see how three-way handshake works on this particular website.
- We sent an syn packet containing data that says that I want to connect to you on Port 443 if the site uses HTTPS protocol.
- If the ports is open and available for communication, website will send syn ack packet back to us indicating us go ahead and connect to me.
- When we want to actually connect to the website, we're going to send ack packet back to the website

# 3\. Ports

- It's a way to communicate with certain protocols. Port is an item that's maybe open on a machine.
    
- Different protocols uses different ports to communicate and there are over 65k ports that can utilizes these protocols.
    
- HTTP uses port 80 by default
    
- HTTPS uses port 443 by default to listen
    

# 4\. TCP vs UDP

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| ==**TCP - Transmission Control Protocol**== | ==**UDP - User Datagram Protocol**== |
| Connection Oriented Protocol | Connection Less Protocol |
| Best Suited for Connection with High Reliability |     |
| Requires an established connection to transmit data (connection should be closed once transmission is complete) | Connectionless protocol with no requirements for opening, maintaining, or terminating a connection |
| HTTP, HTTPS, FTP, SFTP utilizes TCP | VoIP, DNS Connection, Video Conferences and Streaming Services utilizes UDP |